# Programmable Templates
## Rationale
One of anki big limitation, as far as I'm concerned, is that templates
can't have code in them. In a fixed note type, most of the templates
are similar. Which means that I have to do a lot of copy-paste. And if
I want to edit a part of the template, I have to edit once in each
template. 

If you know a little bit of Python and of HTML, you can use this
add-on to ensure that your template is generated by some arbitrary
Python code. The Python expression is given as an attribute of an HTML
tag of the template, so that the HTML still remains valid.

This add-on also gives you a library of basic component, called
generators, to write templates. Those generators allow you to change
the template, depending on whether the template is printed on the
question side or on the answer side. Depending on whether some field
is filled or empty (this is similar to ```{{#foo}}Foo:
{{foo}}{{/foo}}``` of Anki. But generators allows you to require twice
that foo is filled, while ```{{#foo}}{{#foo}}Foo:
foo{{/foo}}{{/foo}}``` would generate an error.)  Those generators
also allow you to change the template, depending on the question you
want to ask. For example, you may want that your template always
contains ```{{#foo}}Foo : {{foo}}{{/foo}}```, unless, on the question
side, you explicitly state to ask «foo». In this case, ```{{#foo}}Foo :
???{{/foo}}``` will be printed instead.

## Usage
This add-on must be used in three successive steps. You must create
the generators you'll use in your templates. Then you must edit your
template to state which generator to use in them, and what question of
this generator is asked. Finally, you must compile the note
type. Those three steps are more detailled below.

Potentially, as a last step, you should check the result, and correct
either the generators or the template if you see a problem.


### Generators
A generator is an abstract piece of template. Each generator can be
compiled into an actual template that anki can use. The result of the
computation depends: 
* on the set of fields present in the model, 
* on whether the generator is used in the question side or in the
  answer side. 
* on some names which are asked or hidden.

Here are a few examples of generators:
* The simplest generators represents a string literal.  For example ``` "foo" ```, is a generator. It is always compiled as ```foo```.
* A list of generator ```[gen1, gen2, gen3]``` (without the double
  quote), is also a generator. When it is compiled, it becomes the
  concatenation of the result of the compilations of gen1, gen2 and
  gen3.
* A more complex generator would be ```QuestionOrAnswer(gen1,
  gen2)```, which compiles as gen1 on the question side, and as gen2
  on the answer side. (Similarly, ```Question(gen)```, compiles as the
  generator gen on the question side, and compiles as an empty string
  on the answer side.)
* ```FilledOrEmpty('foo', gen1, gen2)``` is a more complex
  generator. It shows gen1 if the field foo is filled, and it shows
  gen2 if the field 'foo' is empty. Thus, it usually compiles  ```{{#foo}}gen1{{/foo}}{{^foo}}gen2{{/foo}}```. However, if this
  generator inside some ```{{#foo}}...{{/foo}}```, since it is already known
  that the field 'foo' is filled, this generator compiles as gen1
  only. Reciprocally, if the field foo is not present in the model,
  then it can't be filled, thus this generator compiles as gen2 only.
  
#### Where to write the generators

You may put your generators in two distinct places. 

Either in this add-on configuration (using the add-on manager). In the
"instructions" field. As a pair ```["generator's 'name",
theGenerator]```. In this case, the generator may use generator
defined above in its code.

Or you can add them in the file user_files/import.py, in this add-on
folder.  Note that this is standard python code, thus this file may
import other file. When you download this add-on, this folder will
already have some content. This content is the actual content used by
this add-on writer. This may serve as code example.

#### Generator's documentation

The current list of generators can be found at
[https://github.com/Arthur-Milchior/anki-template-card-type/blob/master/generators/README.md]. This
document also explains how to create more generators. Don't hesitate
to send me your generators so that I can include them in this add-on.

### Template
The templates must satisfy a few basic rules:
* Compiled or not, the template must be valid HTML.
* The code written for this add-on must never be shown in anki's
  card. Thus it is written in parameters of HTML tag.
* Compiling a template already compiled does not change the
  template.
* The compilation can be undone, in the sens that some code can remove the
  result of the compilation (i.e. the content of a tag), and keep only
  the code (i.e. the tag and its attributes).
  
An HTML tag is used by this add-on if it has a "template"
parameter. The action done on this tag depends on the value of this
paramer. The current possible values are listed below.


The current list of template's tag can be found at
[https://github.com/Arthur-Milchior/anki-template-card-type/tree/master/templates]. This
document also explains how to create more templates. Don't hesitate
to send me your generators so that I can include them in this add-on.

#### Generator
The most basic template's value is a generator. This generator is
compiled and the result of the compilation is put between the tags.
```
    <span template="eval" generator="foo" asked="bar"/>
```
This compile as 
```
<span template="eval" generator="foo" asked="bar">
  Result of the compilation of foo, where the name bar is asked.
</span>
```

More precisely, if ```foo``` is the generator ```DecoratedField("bar")```,
then this templates compiles, on the question side, as:
```
<span template="eval" generator="foo" asked="bar">
  {{#bar}}bar: ???{{/bar}}
</span>
```
and on the answer side as:
```
<span template="eval" generator="foo" asked="bar">
  {{#bar}}bar: {{bar}}{{/bar}}
</span>
```

#### Front side
Anki has a special field called {{FrontSide}}, which show the content
of the question side of the card. Its use is really limited, because
every single thing in the question side appears in the answer
side. Instead, this add-on allow you to use ```<span template='Front
side'>```, to obtain the question side, where each generators are
recompiled using the knowledge that this is the answer side.


In the last example ```<span template='Front side'/>``` would compile as:
```
<span template='Front side'>
  <span template='eval' generator='foo' asked='bar'>
    {{#bar}}bar: {{bar}}{{/bar}}
  </span>
</span>
```

#### Instruction
You may want to execute an arbitrary Python expression ```foo``` during the
compilation. This can be done using ```<span template='instructions'
instr="foo"/>```. Note that this must remains valid html, thus <, > and
' must be replaced in foo by ```&lt;```, ```&gt;``` and ```&quot;```.

#### String
You may want to have a string ```foo``` which is shown only when the
template is compiled, and absent when the template is
«uncompiled». This can be done using ```<span template='string'
string="foo"/>```.

Having some text present only during uncompilation is not currently
possible, and I don't intend to ever do it. Because uncompiling means
removing, and never adding.

#### Fixing content
You may want to ensure that the content of some part of the text is
not changed. This can be done using ```<span
template='fix'>foo<span>```. Not that if foo contains template, they
may be compiled (TODO: remove the last statement.)
Note that if this span is contained in another template, it may still
be removed. This span does not affect tags containing it.

### Compiling
In the browser, select at least one card. Then on Edit>Template. It
will compile the templates of the selected card(s).

## Warning
This is still relatively experimental. It works on the author's
computer. But it is possible that anything breaks on anothe
computer. So think about backuping your note type before using this add-on.

## Configuration
Currently, there is a single field in the json configuration field. It
is called: "instructions". This is a list of instructions.

Each instruction is either a string, which is interpreted as standard
python code, in the environment of the add-on. 

Or a pair ("name","expression"), in which case a name is added to the
environment, whose value is "expression" evaluated in the current
add'on environment. An expression may use names defined above, and any
generator.

## Advice
Using add-on [Newline in strings in add-ons
configurations](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/112201952) you can
have new lines in you configuration file. This will considerably help
you writing your code. However, writing code in user_files may be easier.

Note that strings, in python, can be defined using single quote
('). Using single quote instead of double quote means that you don't
have to escape your quote in the json.

## TODO 
Add more generators /syntactic sugar. 

## Links, licence and credits

Key         |Value
------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright   | Arthur Milchior <arthur@milchior.fr>
Based on    | Anki code by Damien Elmes <anki@ichi2.net>
License     | GNU AGPL, version 3 or later; http://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl.html
Source in   | https://github.com/Arthur-Milchior/anki-
Addon number| [NNNNNNNNNNNN](https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/NNNNNNNNNNNN)
